Hello and welcome back to the course on
R programming. Today we're talking
about basic operations of data frame.
Ok so we already know the dollar sign
and that will come in handy today, that's
a good start.
Let's look at what we can do with a data
frame so here I'll just type in
basic operations with a data frame. So I'm
just gonna say DF.
Alright so what we're going to start
with? Well we're going to start with the
most probably common thing that you
might want to do for data frame is
subsetting so we already know about
subsetting from matrices right and some
of those things we know or probably all
them will come in handy today, so let's
say we want to look at stats but we will
look at only the first 10 rows, how
would we do it? Would say that, it's a
stats and then it would say in square
brackets 1 to 10 comma nothing right
that means the first 10 rows and all of
the columns because there's nothing here,
to run that you'll see we've got 10 rows
and all the columns right? So I could have,
that is, let's type in a comment
subsetting. I could have done a similar
thing, I could have said stats and I
would have, I could have said the third to the
ninth comma nothing right or another one
that we are where you know is we want to
look at specific rows. We want to look at the
fourth row and the hundredth row comma
nothing.
See we've got the fourth and hundred and
you can see that every time the numbers
of the rows are maintained or they're
preserved so that preserves the
structure of the data set so basically
you it doesn't change to one and two
it stays for 400 so then you can know
where they where these rows came from in
the original data set.
Alright so that's subsetting and now
let's remember one thing that we talked
about previously is let's say remember, remember
how the square brackets were right? Let's
type in some examples. Let's say we want
to look at stats and we only want to
look at the first row right? If we run
that, yep we get the first row and what
do we get here? We'll remember in a
matrix and we extracted just one row
what it would
do is it would get rid of the name here
and it would drop a dimension basically
turn the row into a vector right? Does
that happen in a data frame? It doesn't
look like it because the row number is
still here, so it looks like this is
still a data frame so let's quickly
check that. We have a function is data
frame they're pretty straightforward all
these functions is and then dot whatever
you're asking about and so if you run
that, you'll see that it's true.
So in a matrix, if you extract one row, it
will turn into a vector. In a data frame
issue, if you extract one row it stays as
a data frame, so there's no need for
that secret parameter that we know about
drop falls right? So let's look at another
example, let's say we want to extract
stats and we want to extract just the
first column, so in this case what are
extracting, we're extracting a country name
and this time it looks like this is no
longer a data frame, looks like this is a
vector that has been printed for us out
into multiple lines right? So let's
quickly check, is this a data frame?
So just to be sure and close that, so you
can see that it's not a data frame
anymore. So if we want to preserve it as
a data frame, what we're going to do
we're going to say stats and then we're
going to say comma 1 and then we'll say
comma drop equals false. That way the
dimension won't be dropped and if you run
that, you can see that this is now a data
frame and it just has one column, so same
thing we can confirm that this is a data
frame by just simply running that is
different function, run that you can see
that now it's true it is a data frame.
Ok that's important to remember because
so it's the same concept of dimensions
be dropped but it only applies when
you're extracting a column, so always
check that just to make sure that you
are working with what you want. Now what
we're going to do is we're going to look
at some mathematical operations so let's
say we want to look at let's check out
our data frame we can see that we've got
two numeric values. Let's just multiply
them, I know it just makes no sense to
multiply birth rate by internet users
but just to prove a point that we can do
that let's check it out. So we'll say,
stats dollar sign, this is adult sign
coming in handy, birth rate multiply by stats, dollar
sign, internet users right? So if I run
that, we'll get the result of that in a
vector, same thing I can add, subtract,
multiply. Let's let's add these two. Now
we've got the addition of the two,
alright so pretty useless operation
right now because they you can't, there's no
point in doing it but it's good to know
that you can do that.
The next thing I want to show you and
this is we're still on the topic of
basic operations with data frames is
adding a column. So you might want to add
a column to your data frame right? So
how would you do that?
Well let's look at our data frame,
you can see that here it's got only five
columns, to add a column, what I would
do is I would say it's very simple, I would say
stats and then I'll just pretend that
the column is already there. I would say
stats, dollar sign and let's call the
column my calc right? For my
super-awesome calculation which has no
meaning and I'll just copy this in here
and then I'll run this line and now if I
run head stats, you'll see that now I have
this extra column, where it has the
values have been multiplied and take
note here that these are still
vectorized operation so everything we're
doing is happening on that fundamental
rule that everything is a vector and
everything is happening in vectorized
form so when you multiply birth rate by
internet users it, R knows that you
want to multiply this value by this
value and gets gives you that value. Then
this value is multiplied by this value
you get that value, so a vector is multiplied by a
vector. Everything's happening
in vectorized form and that's why
vectorize operations are so important in
R. Alright, so that's how you add a column.
Now I wanted to actually test your
knowledge, test of knowledge.
Let's say I want to add a column stats
right XYZ but I'll add a column with
only a vector that only has five value
so I'm going to add a vector of five
values into a matrix or internal frame
that has a hundred and ninety-five rows.
What will happen now? Can you tell me
what will happen? So will there be an
error?
Well there isn't an error, why isn't
there an error?
Let's check it out. If you look at head
stats what you'll see is 1,2,3,4,5,1. What
is that one stand for? What does that
mean?
Let's look at a few more, let's say head
stats n=10. What you can see is
1,2,3,4,5,1,2,3,4,5 and I guarantee if you type
in more, 12 let's say. It just keeps going
1,2 so what happened here is the vector
1:5 was recycled and we talked about
this way back I think it was in section
2, that when you try to perform an
operation where vectors in sufficient
length it gets recycled right? But the
important thing is that this vector or
this vector has to be a multiple of this
vector. So if for instance I type in here
1:4 right which 195 is not a multiple
of four around that you'll see I'll get
an error, because R can't recycle that
vector and it's telling you about that. So
there you go, that's just a blast from the
past or a test of your knowledge and
just make sure you remember about
recycling of vectors and vectorized
operations because that can occur
sometimes without you even intending it
on or remembering about it. So now the
last thing we want to look at is remove
a column, how do you remove a column? Now
that I have these columns stats,
let's look at head stats, how do I
remove these columns that I don't want? It's
very simple, you say stats dollar sign
and then the column name and all you have
to do is assign it the value of null.
Remember how we got used to get rid of
names in named objects? Similar concept
and let's get another one here we will
say XYZ, let's get rid of it and now if I check
out head stats, you'll see that no more
columns. That's, there are a couple of ways
to get rid of columns and R but this
is by far the fastest and easiest one so
let's just stick to that one and you
will learn new ways. We do that quite a
lot in this course like I show you the
main concept and you will pick up other
concepts as you go along as you get to
know the language better, I don't want to
bombard and overwhelm
you with all this information. We're just
learning, we're on a journey right? We're
in journey and we're learning what we
need to go through this journey and have
fun and make it exciting, so if you want
to get rid of a column just use this way,
it's the fastest and easiest one to use.
Alright,
that brings us to the end of today's
tutorial. I hope you enjoyed these
basic operations with data frames. As you
can see we're slowly getting building
this knowledge on data frames and
in this tutorial I actually encourage you
to take a break and actually practice
what you've learned,
do some of your operations switch some
imagination on, try some different
operations here, mathematical operators
and so on. So just practice this stuff
and let that knowledge sink in and I'll
see you in the next tutorial,
until then happy coding.